---
layout: post
title: "todo list"
date: 2012-01-08 20:56
comments: true
categories: 
---

Up to this point, I have simply been working on whatever I felt I needed to do
in the order I felt I needed to do it.  While this works for projects without
set requirements or a set due date, this project has a certain set of
functionality requirements, and it is due at the end of the quarter, which is
why I have taken some time this week to determine what I would like to have in
the final game and how long I expect each of those features to take (based on my
current rate of progress).

## Feature Listing

 *  Character movement/interaction (1 week)

    Because I am using a physics simulation for the world, I need to integrate
the character into that simulation in order for the character to interact with
the world.  Furthermore, I want the camera to be 3rd person, so I need to
introduce a 3D model of the character and animate that model.
 
 *  Models (1 week)

    I am not a graphic designer, and I don't want to pretend to be.  I plan on
'borrowing' models from an existing game, but I am unsure to the process (other
than I know it is possible).  It will be useful to have a determined set of
models before attempting to design levels, in case the models are different
proportions than I expect.

 *  Forking time (1 week)

    I can currently rewind time, but that always keeps the same number of
objects in the simulation.  Forking time will require introducing new objects
into the scene and contains a good number of unknowns that I have not yet
explored.

 *  Level design (1 week)

    The component that will absolutely determine this game's success is the
quality of its levels.  I need a good chunk of time to design and build the
levels.

 *  Audio system (1 week)

    One of the more fun aspects of this game.  I want to have ambient sound
effects and music (as most games do), except I want the audio react to how the
user is manipulating time.  For example, if the user rewinds time at 2x, the
audio will backwards at 2x.  I know OpenAL provides this functionality, but I
have never actually used the library before.

 *  Main menu (.5 week)
    A minor feature, but it is nice to not immediately be thrown into the game
after launching it.  It would also be nice to track the user's progress and let
them save and load games.

There are plenty of other things that I would **like** to do but don't think I
will have time to do.  Examples include, but are not limited to: Python
integration, S-3D rendering, and space manipulation (via portals).

## Making more time

Quickly adding up my time estimates, I come up with 5.5 weeks.  Well there are
5.5 weeks left in the quarter, so this should be no problem to finish on time,
right?  I would like to answer "yes", but I know from past experience that I
tend to underestimate my time requirements, overestimate my free time, and do
not foresee all of the problems that I will face.  I typically like to include a
20% time buffer to account for those unknowns, and this current setup does not
provide that.  Still, I based these time estimates on my current work load.  I
have been prioritizing Senior Project over this project during the quarter, and
I think it is a good time to switch priorities since our Senior Project is ahead
of schedule.  With this change, I believe that I can finish this project by the
end of 10th week, but I do not want to discard the possibility that it will take
longer.

